we'll take you straight to Downing
Street from the British Retail
Consortium and I wanted to take this
opportunity to provide you with an
update on the food supply chain and the
steps that we are all taking to ensure
that everyone has access to the food
that they need we recognize that this is
a challenging time and that there are
many things that the government is
asking the nation to do differently as
we work together to fight this pandemic
however there is one message I want to
start with loud and clear this afternoon
which is be responsible when you shop
and think of others buying more than you
need means that others may be left
without and it is making life more
difficult for those frontline workers
such as our doctors and nurses and NHS
support staff who are working so hard in
such difficult circumstances
so as you shop think of those who are
finishing their late shifts and need to
pop to the local shop at the end of a
long day today the Prime Minister and I
have spoken to the retail sector there
is more than enough food to go around
and our food supply chain is able to
expand production to cope with increased
demand in the last week sales of some
foods have increased significantly and
manufacturers have produced around 50%
more food than they usually would there
is no shortage of food available and
more is arriving at shops every day but
the challenge that all of our retailers
have faced is keeping shelves stocked
throughout the day in the face of
increased purchasing behavior we all
have a role to play in ensuring that we
come through this together so the
government has taken steps to set aside
rules restricting delivery to stores and
relaxed restrictions on government gov
driver hours so that more Goods can be
delivered to every store every day and
we have also set aside competition laws
so that supermarkets can coordinate
their efforts locally sharing staff
sharing delivery vehicles and
coordinating their store opening times
to ensure that food reaches every part
of the country
we've also waved the plastic bag charge
and on Ahnold for online
is to speed up deliveries our retailers
and food producers who supply them are
working around the clock to keep shelf
stocked and the nation fed supermarkets
are recruiting more staff protecting
shopping time for older and vulnerable
people and limiting shopping hours so
they have more time to restock and I
want to take this opportunity to thank
all those staff working in our
supermarkets and food businesses up and
down the country today who are doing so
much to deliver such a crucial service
to us all but as the Prime Minister has
said many times we need every citizen of
this country to play their part too some
supermarkets have put in place purchase
limits on some items to ensure that
there is fair trading and that their
shells remain stopped for longer
everyone must respect such measures and
respect the staff working in these shops
who are doing their best to ensure that
both you and your neighbors get the food
supplies that you need thank you I'd
like to pass over to Helen No thank you
thank you I'm just to pick up on a
couple of points there firstly I mean
you don't need you don't need me to tell
you about the the sort of levels of
unprecedented demand that we've all seen
and I really wanted to just reassure
everybody that people right across the
food industry from growers packers
producers distributors drivers and the
people right at the front line in our
stores are doing everything they can to
make sure that we have the food food
that we all need and it's almost like
we're seeing basically a peak in demand
like Christmas without the four month
buildup in in planning that you would
normally have in advance and we've been
able to do that in two weeks there is
plenty of food in the supply chain the
issue is around people and lorries so
getting that food right into the front
line on to our shelves which is why
we've seen shortages in some areas
across across lots of different
different lines in different at
different areas of the country what's
been vital over the last few days is the
dialogue that we've had with government
they really listen Claire
to the things that people across the
industry have highlighted that would
make it easier to to increase capacity
they've the there the key is I guess not
just that listening but being able to
act quickly and and George is
highlighted there a couple of things I
mean for example lifting curfew hours
for deliveries has enabled much more
lorries to get through the supply chain
and into stores more quickly and there's
a whole list of things where we've
raised an issue and it's been addressed
quickly and I think that is going to be
vital as we go forward over the over the
coming few weeks and I think the you
know the food retailers that I'm talking
to every on every day and on the call
with the Prime Minister earlier really
wanted to undermine underline that
message about you know in encouraging
everybody to really be considerate in
what they buy make sure that they only
buy what they need there is there is a
billion pounds more food in people's
houses than there was three weeks ago so
we should make sure we we eat some of it
and be considerate and also think about
other people right across your
communities and how we can all help them
in making sure that they can pick up and
get their shopping and so I think it's
much more about how we all work together
to to rise to the challenges that we're
facing Thank You Helen and thank you so
I would just like to make a plea on
behalf of all my colleagues in the NHS
nurses doctors paramedics and many many
others who are working incredibly hard
at the moment to manage this outbreak of
coronavirus are now preparing for the
surge that they know will be coming at
them it's incredibly important that they
to have access to food to those
essential supplies that they need I'm
sure many of you will have seen a video
posted on social media yesterday by Dawn
the critical care nurse who was in tears
at the end of a long shift because she
could not get access to the supplies
that she needed and and frankly we
should all be ashamed that that has to
happen it's unacceptable these are the
very people that we will
all need to look after perhaps us or our
loved ones in the weeks ahead it's
critical that by not stockpiling by not
selfishly shopping by leaving those
supplies for others to but our health
workers are able to get access to to
what they need to these are the people
that we will all be relying on more than
we ever have done in the weeks ahead
thanks very much and Secretary of State
many of the pleas that we made so far
have fallen on deaf ears is the
government prepared to at some point
intervene and perhaps introduce
compulsory limits on what people can buy
and a supplemental questionnaire for me
many people will be open about today for
a walk with the families and we'll see
parks absolutely packed with other
people is that safe and should people be
taking further measures to distance from
others in public spaces
answer the first point of may refer to
Steven on the second the reality is that
most of the supermarkets are already of
their own accord and they they've
discussed this putting limits on certain
items so I don't think it is necessary
or appropriate for the government to to
take this different stores on different
items are working together to identify
what an appropriate limit is today I'm
asking everybody to respect what those
supermarkets are doing they are trying
to ensure that their shelves don't go
empty early in the morning and to do
that and achieve that they are putting
item limits for certain goods and it's
very important that everybody respects
that more food is arriving every day
there's no shortage of food production
the crucial thing is that we need people
to come down and buy only what they need
and to think of others when they are
purchasing John
thank you John Craig is quite skynews
mr. Eustace hasn't more pressure been
put on supermarkets by the decision to
close pubs cafes and restaurants and a
medical question if I may for mr. Paris
we've broadcast on Sky News in the past
hour an interview with a leading ear
nose and throat consultant that's
professor Nirmal Kumar who's revealed
some new symptoms for the Cova dean a
loss of smell or taste I'm not sure if
you're familiar with this and he says
two of his senior colleagues are
suffering from this and he's very
concerned about the risk to senior
frontline medics and I wondered if you
aware of this and I wondered if what
action you at in your organization are
taking to protect frontline medics from
these new symptoms on the first point
the truth is that there's already been a
significant switch in the last three
weeks to people purchasing from
supermarkets rather than eating out the
further announcements that were made
yesterday are judged necessary to
control the progress of this disease and
in order to protect our NHS that's why
we've taken the further step of closing
those public venues but it's a
relatively small amount we judge of the
increased demand in supermarkets to date
the the biggest increase in demand is
from a small number of people who have
been stockpiling certain Goods and
indeed we estimate that in the past
three weeks around a billion pounds
worth of additional food has been put
into households that has not yet been
consumed symptoms like many viruses that
give infections of the upper respiratory
tract so that's the nose and the throat
there's a range of symptoms the two
communists are by far cough and a fever
and that's exactly why though that they
are the two symptoms that we are asking
people to self isolate if they get those
symptoms so those are the commonest
symptoms in terms of staff
should it's incredibly important that
staff followed the advice from the
experts of Public Health England who
have described the protection in terms
of personal protection protected
equipped equipment that staff should
take and of course that is what will
protect staff from getting the
coronavirus and just just coming back to
the demand point I think many of the the
businesses that that service all as
customers have operations right across
Europe and they can look and see what's
happened to demand in the days post you
know significant announcements like the
one that was made yesterday by the Prime
Minister and what we've seen in Ireland
for example is that that demand is
spikes again after the announcement but
there now is beginning to actually trail
off so it gives a lot of comfort that
that's what we're going to see here as
well in terms of trends cars inning
Thank You secretary state Carlton inform
ITV News that one for each of your
experts if you don't mind Helen first of
all you said the problem is people and
lorries what are you doing to address
that shortage of people in lorries is
there something government can do for
example is this a job for the mo D
perhaps I'm one for you Stephen if you
don't mind I gather nice has just issued
guidance saying that doctors should base
admission to critical care beds on the
patient's chances of recovery our
doctors already having to make those
sorts of difficult decisions to turn
some people away and if it hasn't
started already how soon do you see that
happening socially I kick off and
certainly in terms of people and what
the industry is doing is making sure
that everybody that can be put into the
frontline is in is being sort of
redirected to ensure that we've all got
the food we need we've got examples of
many people from head offices of
businesses going into into stores into
the warehouses in order to support their
colleagues and on their lorries I mean
that was an issue in terms of driver
hours one of the areas that was talked
about very early on with George and his
team in ensuring that we had the
flexibility to be able to
increase the capacity within that bit of
the supply chain I might just add on
that point that we're also helping to
facilitate discussions between retailers
and those in the food service sector so
it's important to note that the
decisions who close pubs and restaurants
and so on that means that there is some
surplus delivery capacity and indeed
staff with expertise in food who could
be redeployed from those companies to
the retail sector which is obviously
seeing an increase in demand so requests
on the mo D for deliveries no but we we
are obviously giving increasingly
thought within government to how we will
protect those who may be self isolating
because they're vulnerable
and I know that more will be said about
this in due course so doctors and other
clinicians are very used to having
discussions with patients and relatives
about treatment choices and frankly our
aim is to make sure that we're in a
position that those discussions are as
they have always been but the way we
will do that to be absolutely clear is
for everybody in society to follow the
guidance that the government is given in
reducing social contacts because that
will reduce the transmission the spread
of the virus will reduce the number of
deaths and the pressure on the NHS yes
we are working night and day to increase
capacity but an increase in capacity and
the reducing demand that will come from
everybody paying attention young and old
to the guidance that's been given will
give us the best possible chance that
doctors and clinicians can have those
discussions in the way they've always
had them thank you sector of state you
do you domestically have purchase limits
and respecting these these rules but the
track record of the last two weeks has
been that people haven't actually been
listen with the government until they're
obliged to do so can you today rule out
100 percent any need for state-backed
rationing of any Goods in the coming
weeks and secondly the Chinese
authorities have led us to believe that
they've almost wiped out coronavirus now
with no new cases daily have you seen
anything within government within
cabinet to suggest that those figures
aren't necessarily true
so on your first point as I said earlier
all of the major retailers are working
together in exercising their own
judgement about where it's appropriate
to put limits item limits on certain
certain certain issues so toilet roll is
one where for reasons that are not
really understood there was a big spike
in purchasing quite early on despite the
fact that toilet roll is made here in
this country and they're able to expand
production very very quickly but that is
an item where to ensure the goods
remained on the shelves the
supermarket's together took a position
of putting an item limit I think it is
best for the retailer's to flexibly come
together and decide what the appropriate
limit is for each item because this is a
changing scenario and as Helen pointed
out we know from other countries such as
Ireland for instance and France that
once people have stocked up their homes
those who are concerned once they have
stopped up with some food then actually
this surge in demand starts to taper off
and when that happens then the retailers
would want to react flexibly to adjust
the limits that they've put in place can
I pick up on that just before we hand
over to Steven are they the relaxation
in competition or I think has given the
the forum to be able to have the
conversations amongst the different
businesses to share ideas and then
actually for each business to implement
the thing that works best for their
customer base and that isn't necessarily
the same firfer for every business I
think where where there are different
issues and they need to all come
together and do the same thing then that
may be appropriate but I think in terms
of sort of limits on individual items
what's happens it's so far is that
individual businesses have really looked
at the way that their business operates
the interactions that they have with
their customers and made sure that what
they've done is the thing that's going
to make most difference to that customer
base and I think looking at those
countries such as China that that got
this disease early and and their
experience is that it is possible to
develop strategies
to suppress and to reduce the virus
different countries take slightly
different approaches but to be honest
they all have the same scientific basis
which is to reduce the spread and the
transmission of the virus in the
community so that fewer people infected
the fewer people who are infected the
fewer deaths the fewer the pressure on
the less the pressure on health services
so the advice in this country which is
follows that scientific basis and is on
the best possible evidence is it
absolutely designed to suppress and
reduce the virus and to reduce the
number of people infected so I think you
can see strategies have been effective
and I'll go back to what I said earlier
that's why it is absolutely crucial that
everybody in the country
follows the guidance that's been given
it's not for somebody else to follow
it's for you to follow it's for me to
follow it's for everybody to follow this
is all our problems are all our problem
and and if we do it together it will be
an effective strategy you do it if you
follow the advice you are saving
somebody's life this is the time in your
lifetime whereby your action will save
somebody's life it's as simple and as
stark as that Dave willing David Waring
the Sun on Sunday and you've already
told us how much has been stockpiled in
people's houses
is it possible Secretary of State to
give us an idea if panic buying
continued at the current rate how long
it would be before we ran out of food in
this country and one little added to
that fresh fruits and vegetables it's
going to be a problem this summer with
them getting
casual workers into to grow to pick
fruits and veg for for the autumn well
on the former point as I said and as
Helen explained the food supply chain is
actually used to dealing with spikes in
demand not least every Christmas there
is a surge in demand and in the last
three weeks they've seen surges that are
similar to that and food manufacturers
have responded by increasing their
production by up to about 50 percent so
we don't think there is a there's a risk
of food running out the challenge we
have is getting food to the
elves and keeping it there which is why
the supermarkets have taken a number of
steps to coordinate their activities and
why we've taken a number of steps to to
make sure we can get more food delivered
to more supermarkets more quickly on
your second point it is the case that we
will shortly be moving into a period for
from around May onwards when we start to
get increased UK production some of the
labor and agriculture moves around from
different sectors so there's already
quite a lot of staff that will be
working in fields in Lincolnshire for
instance on the the winter vegetable
industry and also in places like
Cornwall and we anticipate that we'll be
able to provide the labor necessary to
ensure that we can continue that harvest
can I can I just pick up on that and I
think what we all need to recognize is
that we may not always be able to buy
exactly the normal things that we would
and that actually there will be any less
choice than perhaps there has otherwise
been but there is they you know there is
I mean I was in my local supermarket
this morning and I didn't get my normal
list of my shop but there was plenty of
other things that I bought instead so it
wasn't like there was nothing available
and I think the other thing about
capacity we've certainly seen that the
production capacity has increased by
about 50 percent and even on the phone
this morning many of the businesses that
also have manufacturing and producing as
part of their supply chain are saying
that they are now looking at how they
can continue to grow that over the
coming days and weeks thank you but
we've heard reports of how ready-made
pies are being sold online sometimes for
around 30 pounds it's something no one
ever expected to see gee are you
concerned that actually profiteering it
could be going on and if needs be is
there a plan to tackle profiteering and
perhaps in the worst case if it gets to
looting and is there a plan that's
ready-made if rationing does need to be
introduced well I might ask Helen
to comment on this point but I would
just say this over the last two weeks
I've been in almost daily contact with
all of our major retailers they are
working in quite challenging situations
and are really stepped up and worked
collectively to ensure that we get food
to people we've not seen any widespread
evidence yet of that kind of increase in
pricing but obviously we keep a close
eye on that I think the the most
important thing as Helen said that we
envisage is being a temporary spike in
demand if other countries are anything
to go by at once people those people who
feel the need to stock up once they have
demand will start to settle I mean I
have been working in the food and the
wider retail industry for more years
than I care to remember but I can
guarantee you that the competitive
nature that across across the industry
is as as robust today as it always is
and that is what has enabled us all as
customers to make sure that we continue
to you know see great value in prices
from our retail businesses I think all
of the conversations that are being held
are absolutely about making sure that we
all have access to the food that we need
working with government on the things
that would facilitate and enable the
changes to to regulations that would
facilitate it and able to that to occur
more effectively and put get those
lorries and and more capacity available
so that the shelves get full Nigel Nigel
Nelson Sunday Mirror secretive state
that the Prime Minister talks about
doing whatever it takes I'm sorry this
is another rationing question but how
can you actually rule out entirely that
we may end up with some kind of
rationing or indeed even ration books
well the point that I made earlier is
that the supermarket's are best place to
judge what stock item limits they should
place on their particular product lines
in order to ensure that they can keep
food on the shelves but there's no sure
of food as I said food manufacturing has
geared up to meet an increase in demand
and it's up by 50% so we think it is
better for individual retailers to make
individual judgments or judgments
collectively about particular lines that
go off the shelves most quickly and
where they may want to take action yes
Henry Bakken from The Telegraph
Secretary of State looking back briefly
to yesterday's economic announcements
it's increasingly clear that the group
that is still most worried other
self-employed is there anything that you
can promise them will there be any more
announcements coming down the line to
give them some hope that they can get
through this secondly looking back to
today's food related stuff is the
government anticipating any supermarket
individual store closures as a result of
staff absences staff going sick and in
that scenario or indeed in any other
scenario is the government planning to
step in to help coordinate local stores
and local supermarkets thank you on your
first point the Chancellor has made a
number of quite dramatic interventions
over the last couple of weeks to help
tackle this this this particular
pandemic including yesterday obviously a
package of measures to help businesses I
know there were there are other issues
that have been raised and it's obviously
for the for the Treasury to keep this
matter under review on your latter
points about staffing in supermarkets
and and the food supply chain more
generally we obviously have designated
those working in the food supply chain
as key workers and we believe that there
will be sufficient resilience having
done that particularly since some are
recruiting staff that have been laid off
from other establishments in the food
service sector we believe that we will
be able to meet those southing
requirements even with the expected
absentee level okay and can I can I just
build on that I think we certainly from
the retailer's point of view they are
absolutely committed to doing everything
they can to to keep the stores open and
examples of closing deli counter
people from head office coming in to
provide support I think a ways that that
will seek to mitigate any particular
shortages that might otherwise cause a
store to close and I think that's a
great opportunity really to to call out
to all the people who work in retail
businesses who work right across the
supply chain who I think I've been doing
an amazing job over the last couple of
weeks in in in working superbly hard in
ensuring that we all have access to the
food that we need I take two final
questions very quickly though if we can
thank you Fatima Manju California
century of states a week from now would
have been the beginning of school easter
holidays there will be many families who
still have holidays with in the UK
booked up cottages by the sea and so on
what is the government's advice to
families about those holidays is it safe
to travel between towns and cities into
the countryside well the advice
obviously we've given so far is we've
the people should be socially isolating
and the whole population should be
limiting as far as possible should be
distancing themselves as far as possible
final question here Lizzie firkin from
the independent and Secretary of State
food banks are struggling to provide for
the most vulnerable with some closing
their doors with the government bring in
any measures to protect them perhaps
exempting them from restrictions and
allowing them to buy in bulk we are in
discussion with all of the supermarkets
to try to ensure that food banks retain
and access to food supply to help the
most vulnerable and it's a piece of work
that we've been working on for the last
week and there will be more that will
say on this and in the coming days thank
you all very much for your time thank
you